# Pytzer package metadata

*The casual user has no need to explicitly call this module.*

`.meta` contains metadata about Pytzer, and provides some tools to investigate and compare the different [interaction parameters](../parameters) that are available to use.

## `.version` - version number

Acts as the single-source-of-truth version number for Pytzer.

---

## Meta-analytical tools

### `.getprmfuncs` - get all interaction parameter functions

Generates a dict of all interaction parameter functions that are available in the [parameters](../parameters) module.

**Syntax:**

```python
prmfuncs = pz.meta.getprmfuncs()
```

<br />

### `.getifuncs` - get specific interaction functions

Extracts all interaction functions for a specific interaction from the `prmfuncs` dict.

**Syntax:**

```python
ifuncs = pz.meta.getifuncs(prmfuncs, itype, ions)
```

**Inputs:**

  * `prmfuncs` - dict generated by `getprmfuncs()`;
  * `itype` - interaction type (see list in the [parameters documentation](../parameters/#interaction-parameter-functions));
  * `ions` - array of ions (or neutral solutes) in the interactions, in the order described in the [libraries documentation](../libraries/#how-a-parameter-library-works), and following the [solute code conventions](../../name-conventions).

**Output:**

  * `ifuncs` - subset of `prmfuncs` defined by the function inputs.

<br />

### `.evalifuncs` - evaluate and compare parameters

Evaluates interaction parameters in an `ifuncs` dict at given input temperature and pressure.

**Syntax:**

```python
ivals = pz.meta.evalifuncs(ifuncs, tempK, pres)
```

**Inputs:**

  * `ifuncs` - dict generated by `getifuncs()`;
  * `tempK` - temperature in K;
  * `pres` - pressure in dbar.

**Output:**

  * `ivals` - dict of interaction parameters evaluated under the input conditions.

<br />

### `.getirefs` - literature sources

Generates a list of literature references for the functions in an `ifuncs` dict.

**Syntax:**

```python
irefs = pz.meta.getirefs(ifuncs)
```

The source codes in the output list are defined in the [documentation references](../../references).
